Axoglial synapses are formed onto pioneer oligodendrocyte precursor cells at the onset of spinal cord gliogenesis.
Virtually all oligodendrocyte precursors cells (OPCs) receive glutamatergic and/or GABAergic synapses that are lost upon their differentiation into oligodendrocytes in the postnatal and adult brain. Although OPCs are generated at mid-embryonic stages, several weeks before the onset of myelination, it remains unknown when and where OPCs receive their first synapses and become susceptible to the influence of neuronal activity. In the embryonic spinal cord, neuro-epithelial precursors in the pMN domain cease generating cholinergic motor neurons (MNs) to produce OPCs when the first synapses are formed in the ventral-lateral marginal zone. We discovered that when the first synapses form onto MNs, axoglial synapses also form onto the processes of neuro-epithelial precursors located in the marginal zone as they differentiate into OPCs. After leaving the neuro-epithelium, these pioneer OPCs preferentially accumulate in the marginal zone where they are contacted by functional glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses. Spontaneous activity of these axoglial synapses was significantly potentiated by cholinergic signaling acting through presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Moreover, we discovered that chronic nicotine treatment significantly increases early OPC proliferation and density in the marginal zone. Our results demonstrate that OPCs are contacted by functional synapses as soon as they emerge from their precursor domain and that embryonic spinal cord colonization by OPCs can be regulated by cholinergic signaling acting onto these axoglial synapses.
Received: 22 June 2017




Revised: 5 March 2018




Accepted: 5 March 2018

DOI: 10.1002/glia.23331

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Axoglial synapses are formed onto pioneer oligodendrocyte
precursor cells at the onset of spinal cord gliogenesis
 Arulkandarajah1 

Guillaume Osterstock1 
 Barbara Le Bras1 
 Kalaimakan Herve
 Le Corronc1,2 
 Antonny Czarnecki1 
 Christine Mouffle1 
 Erika Bullier1 

Herve
Pascal Legendre1




Jean-Marie Mangin1

1
, UM119,
Sorbonne Universite
Neuroscience Paris Seine, Paris F-75005,
France Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), UMR 8246, Paris
F-75005, France Institut National de la
 et de la Recherche Me
dicale
Sante
(INSERM), U1130, Paris, F-75005, France
2

 d''Angers, Angers, 49000, France
Universite

Abstract
Virtually all oligodendrocyte precursors cells (OPCs) receive glutamatergic and/or GABAergic synapses that are lost upon their differentiation into oligodendrocytes in the postnatal and adult brain.
Although OPCs are generated at mid-embryonic stages, several weeks before the onset of myelination, it remains unknown when and where OPCs receive their first synapses and become
susceptible to the influence of neuronal activity. In the embryonic spinal cord, neuro-epithelial precursors in the pMN domain cease generating cholinergic motor neurons (MNs) to produce OPCs

Correspondence
Jean-Marie Mangin, Laboratoire
Neuroscience Paris Seine, 7-9 Quai Saint
Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.
Email: jean-marie.mangin@inserm.fr
Funding information
Agence Nationale de la Recherche, Grant/
Award Number: ANR-11-JSV4-002-01;
Institut de Recherche sur la Moelle et
phale; AFM-Telethon; Fondation pour
l''ence
dicale
la Recherche Me

when the first synapses are formed in the ventral-lateral marginal zone. We discovered that when
the first synapses form onto MNs, axoglial synapses also form onto the processes of neuroepithelial precursors located in the marginal zone as they differentiate into OPCs. After leaving the
neuro-epithelium, these pioneer OPCs preferentially accumulate in the marginal zone where they
are contacted by functional glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses. Spontaneous activity of these
axoglial synapses was significantly potentiated by cholinergic signaling acting through presynaptic
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Moreover, we discovered that chronic nicotine treatment significantly increases early OPC proliferation and density in the marginal zone. Our results demonstrate
that OPCs are contacted by functional synapses as soon as they emerge from their precursor
domain and that embryonic spinal cord colonization by OPCs can be regulated by cholinergic
signaling acting onto these axoglial synapses.

KEYWORDS

development, electrophysiology, neural precursor, oligodendrocyte

1 
 INTRODUCTION

the mammalian postnatal and adult brain and they have been reported
in all brain areas investigated so far - hippocampus, cortex, cerebellum,

Oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) are a subpopulation of glial

brainstem, corpus callosum and optic nerve (Gallo, Mangin, Kukley, &

cells known to give rise to most if not all myelinating oligodendrocytes,

Dietrich, 2008; Hill & Nishiyama, 2014; Lin & Bergles, 2004). Because

both during development and after a demyelinating injury in the

axoglial synapses are formed de novo during remyelination (Etxeberria

postnatal and adult brain (Bergles & Richardson, 2016). One of the

et al., 2010; Sahel et al., 2015) and are lost upon differentiation into

most intriguing property of brain OPCs is their ability to receive

oligodendrocytes (De Biase, Nishiyama, & Bergles, 2010; Kukley,

glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses from neurons, both in the grey

Nishiyama, & Dietrich, 2010), it has been suggested that they play a

(Bergles, Roberts, Somogyi, & Jahr, 2000; Lin & Bergles, 2004; Mangin,

specific role during the early steps of the myelination/remyelination

Kunze, Chittajallu, & Gallo, 2008) and white matter areas (Etxeberria,

process at postnatal and adult stages (Etxeberria et al., 2010; Gallo

Mangin, Aguirre, & Gallo, 2010; Kukley, Capetillo-Zarate, & Dietrich,

et al., 2008; Paukert & Bergles, 2006; Sahel et al., 2015). However,

2007; Sahel et al., 2015; Ziskin, Nishiyama, Rubio, Fukaya, & Bergles,

OPCs are generated from their precursor domains at mid-embryonic

2007). Axoglial synapses appear to be a universal feature of OPCs in

stages, several weeks before the onset of myelination (Rowitch, 2004)

1678




C 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
V

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/glia

Glia. 2018;66:1678-1694.

OSTERSTOCK




ET AL.

1679

and it still remains unknown whether these pioneer OPCs could already

phosphodiesterase promoters (CNP-EGFP) in oligodendroglial cells

be under the influence of axoglial transmission at such early stages,

(Yuan et al., 2002) were crossed with 8-12-week-old Swiss mice

when they start colonizing the central nervous system.

(Janvier labs, Le Genest-Saint-Isle, France). Embryonic mouse spinal

The two earliest markers of OPCs are the chondroitin sulfate

cords were dissected as previously described (Czarnecki et al., 2014).

proteoglycan NG2 and the platelet-derived growth factor receptor A

Briefly, pregnant mice were killed using a lethal dose of CO2 followed

(PDGFRa; Nishiyama, Lin, Giese, Heldin, & Stallcup, 1996; Pringle &

by cervical dislocation. Mice embryos of both sexes were removed and

Richardson, 1993). In the mouse spinal cord, these two markers first

quickly observed under a 470-515 nm excitation light using a fluores-

appear around the 12th embryonic day of development (E12) in a

cence stereo-microscope (Leica MZ FLIII, Wetzlar, Germany) to identify

restricted domain of the ventricular zone (VZ) lining the central canal

EGFP-expressing embryos. The SC was isolated from EGFP positive

known as the pMN domain (for precursor of Motor Neurons). The

embryos. Whole SCs were then incubated for 1 hr at 378C in ACSF

pMN domain, characterized by the expression of the olig2 transcription

containing 126 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 10 mM glucose, 4.5 mM

factor, contains neuro-epithelial precursors which switch from motor

KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, and 1 mM MgCl2 (325 mosmol/

neuron (MN) genesis to OPC production around E12. However, the

kg H2O), continuously bubbled with a 95% O2-5% CO2 gas mixture.

molecular and cellular mechanism(s) triggering and regulating this event
are still not fully understood. In the embryonic spinal cord, synaptogen-

2.2 
 Patch-clamp recordings

esis also starts around E12 when longitudinal axons from GABAergic
and glutamatergic spinal interneurons (INs) form their first synapses
onto MN dendrites located in the marginal zone (MZ; Czarnecki et al.,
2014; Scain et al., 2010; Vaughn, Henrikson, & Grieshaber, 1974).

The isolated spinal cord was placed in a recording chamber and continuously perfused (2 ml/min) at room temperature (208C-248C) with the oxygenated ACSF described above. Whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings of

In the present study, we found that, at E12, the first OPCs

CNP-EGFP cells were performed under direct visualization using an

expressing NG2 in the pMN domain exhibit radial processes that cross

infrared-sensitive CCD video camera. In addition to their GFP fluores-

the ventral parenchyma to reach the MZ near the motor exit point

cence, OPCs were distinguished based on their location inside the mar-

(MEP), where MN axons exit the spinal cord. During the next two days,

ginal zone, their elongated morphology and the presence of IA and IKDR

as they leave the neuro-epithelium to colonize the ventral spinal cord,

voltage-dependent currents. To confirm their OPC identity, some

the cell bodies of these pioneer OPCs were found to preferentially

recorded cells were filled with neurobiotin (1 mg/ml) and revealed in com-

accumulate around the MEP. By performing patch-clamp recordings in

bination with NG2 immunostaining (N 5 6/6). Whole-cell patch-clamp

whole embryonic spinal cord preparation, we found that these pioneer

electrodes were pulled from thick-wall borosilicate glass using a Brown-

OPCs formed functional synapses with glutamatergic and GABAergic

Flaming puller (Sutter Instrument, Novato, CA, USA). Patch-clamp electro-

axons as soon as their soma invaded the marginal zone. In addition,

des had resistances of 5-7 MX. For voltage-clamp experiments, the elec-

electron microscopy showed that synaptic-like axoglial contacts are

trode was filled with a solution containing the following: 130 mM

already forming onto neuro-epithelial precursor endfeet located around

K-gluconate, 4 mM NaCl, 10 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES, 4 mM MgCl2,

the MEP at E12. Although OPCs did not express any functional nico-

4 mM Na2 ATP, 0.3 mM Na3 GTP, pH 7.2 (290 mosmol/kg-H2O). In such

tinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR), both glutamatergic and GABAer-

conditions, the equilibrium potential for chloride ions (ECl) was 260 mV

gic synaptic inputs were significantly potentiated by exogenous

while the cations reverse potential (Ecat) was 0 mV. Signals were recorded

acetylcholine acting through presynaptic nAChRs. The application of

using a Multiclamp 700B amplifier (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA,

nAChR antagonist was found to significantly depress only GABAergic

USA). Signals were low-pass filtered (4 kHz), digitized (20 kHz) using a Digi-

evoked currents and spontaneous GABAergic synaptic activity, show-

data 1440A interface, and acquired online using pClamp 10 software

ing that endogenous cholinergic signaling preferentially potentiate early

(Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA). Analyses were performed off-line

GABAergic axoglial inputs onto OPCs. Finally, we found that chronic

using Axograph X.1.5.4 software (AxoGraph Scientific Software, Sydney,

administration of nicotine during the onset of gliogenesis significantly

Australia). In voltage-clamp experiments, cells were recorded either at a

increased OPC density and proliferation in the ventral spinal cord.

holding potential of 260 or 0 mV to isolate cationic and chloride currents,
respectively. Electrical stimulations of longitudinal axons located in the MZ

2 
 MATERIALS AND METHODS

were performed using bipolar platinum electrodes (FHC, Bowdoin, ME,

2.1 
 Isolated embryonic spinal cord preparation

formed at a low frequency (0.016 Hz) in order to evoke a stable response.

USA) placed 500 mm rostrally to the recording site. Stimulations were per-

All experiments were performed in accordance with European Community guiding principles on the care and use of animals (86/609/CEE, CE

2.3 
 Pharmacological agents

Off J L358, December 18, 1986), the French decree 97/748 of Octo-

During patch-clamp recordings, all drugs were applied via the bath per-

publique Francaise, October 20, 1987, pp.
ber 19, 1987 (J Off Re

fusion system. Typically, the effect of drugs reached a steady-state

12245-12248), and the recommendations from the Centre National de

within 3-4 minutes after solution switch, and the mean recovery time

la Recherche Scientifique. C57BL/6 mice expressing an enhanced

was 15 min. Activity was recorded for at least 5 min at steady state

green fluorescence protein (EGFP) driven by cyclic nucleotide 3-

under each condition. The following pharmacological agents were used:

1680




Acetylcholine chloride (100 lM, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany),
TTX (0.3-1 lM, Alomone Labs, Jerusalem, Israel), gabazine (3 lM, Tocris
Bioscience, Minneapolis, MN, USA), (1)-Nicotine hydrogen tartrate salt
(10 lM, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), QX-314-Cl (1 mM, SigmaAldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), CNQX Disodium (20 lM, Tocris Bioscience, Minneapolis, MN, USA), DL-APV (200 lM, Tocris Bioscience,
Minneapolis, MN, USA), Mecamylamine hydrochloride (50 lM, Tocris
Bioscience, Minneapolis, MN, USA), and D-tubocurarine chloride (5 lM,
Tocris Bioscience, Minneapolis, MN, USA).

2.4 
 Fetal nicotine exposure

OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

2.6 
 Confocal microscopy
Immunostainings were imaged using a SP5 confocal microscope (Leica,
Darmstadt, Germany) using a 203 oil-immersion objective with a numerical aperture of 1.25, as well as with a 633 oil-immersion objective with
a numerical aperture of 1.32 and a 13 digital zoom magnification. Serial
optical sections were obtained with a Z-step of 4 lm (203) and 2 lm
(633). Images (1024 3 1024; 8-bit grayscale) were stored using Leica
software LAS-AF and analyzed using ImageJ 1.41 (National Institutes of
Health; http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) and Adobe Photoshop CS6 (Adobe
software, San Jose, CA, USA). Quantifications were performed manually
on 20-lm-thick transverse sections using ImageJ software.

8-12 weeks old gestating mice received from E10.5 to E14.5 either a
chronic subcutaneous (s.c) infusion of a physiological saline (0.9% NaCl,
Vehicle, N 5 10) or nicotine in buffered saline solution (Nicotinetreated, N 5 14; pH 5 7.4) via mini-osmotic pumps (Alzet, Cupertino,
CA, USA). Nicotine concentrations were calculated as the base. Nicotine hydrogen tartrate salt (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) was
used to prepare stock solutions. The nicotine tartrate salt was dissolved
in sterile, physiological saline and administered continuously in a volume of 10 mg/d/kg body weight

2.5 
 Immunohistochemistry

2.7 
 Electron microscopy
Synapse formation onto nestin-positive cells was analyzed by the preembedding immunogold method with silver-enhancement (Bernard,
Levey, & Bloch, 1999). 2 mm-thick sections were made at the hindlimb
level of E12.5 embryos and were immersion-fixed in PB with 0.2%
glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at room temperature
during 1 hr and further post-fixed in PB with 2% PFA at 48C during 1 hr.
After agarose inclusion, 80 lm-thick vibratome coronal sections were
immunolabeled with a mouse monoclonal anti-Nestin antibody (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and an anti-mouse biotinylated antibody and

For confocal microscopy, E12.5-E14.5 CNP-EGFP negative and

Nanogold streptavidine (Nanoprobes, Yaphank, NY, USA). The diameter

positive embryos were collected from pregnant females. Embryos were

of gold particles was increased using a silver enhancement (HQ silver,

immediately fixed by immersion in PBS containing 4% PFA (freshly pre-

Nanoprobes, Yaphank, NY, USA). Sections were then post-fixed, dehy-

pared, pH 7.4) for 2 hr at 48C. Embryos were then rinsed with PBS and

drated and embedded in epon resin. Areas of interest were cut and glued

cryoprotected in PBS containing 20% sucrose. Tissues were embedded

onto resin blocks. 70 nm-thick sections were cut with an ultracut UCT

in OCT medium (VWR, Fontenay-sous-bois, France) and quickly frozen

microtome (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany), stained with lead citrate and Ura-

at 2508C in isopentane. 50-lm-thick serial floating coronal sections

nyless (Delta Microscopies, Mauressac, France) and analyzed with a

were obtained using a cryostat (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) and stored in

transmission electron microscope (EM 912 Omega, Zeiss, Oberkochen,

PBS at 48C. For immunostaining, sections were then washed in PBS

Germany). Images were captured with a digital camera (SS-CCD, Proscan

and incubated for 1 hr in a blocking solution (1% fish gelatin in PBS)

1kx1k, Toronto, Canada) and analyzed with the iTEM software.

with 0.3% Triton X-100 and then for 48 hr at 48C with the primary
antibodies, which were diluted in the blocking solution containing 0.4%
Triton X-100. Sections were then washed in PBS and incubated for
3 hr at room temperature in the secondary antibodies, diluted in 0.4%
Triton X-100 blocking solution. After washing in PBS, slides were dried
and mounted in Mowiol medium (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany).
The following primary antibodies were used: a guinea pig polyclonal
anti-NG2 antibody (kindly provided by William B. Stallcup, Burnham
Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, California), a rabbit polyclonal
anti-Olig2 antibody (Millipore, Darmstadt, germany), a mouse monoclonal anti-Ki-67 antibody (BD Pharmigen, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), a
mouse monoclonal anti-nestin antibody (Millipore), a rabbit polyclonal
anti-VIAAT antibody (Dumoulin et al., 1999; kindly provided by Bruno
 Paris Diderot, Paris, France) and
Gasnier, Neurophotonics Lab, Universite
a rabbit polyclonal anti-VGluT2 antibody (Herzog et al., 2001; kindly pro-

2.8 
 Data analysis
Standard off-line detection of synaptic currents was done with Axograph
X.1.5.4 software (AxoGraph Scientific Software, Sydney, Australia). In
brief, a template was generated and used to scan the raw trace for similar
waveforms. All matching events were stored and, when present, false
positive events were discarded, either manually or automatically on the
basis of their amplitude or kinetics. Mean synaptic currents rate was then
calculated every second and plotted in 30 s binning over the whole time
course of the experiments. For the quantification of the mean effects of
acetylcholine and nicotine, the mean rates were calculated at the steady
state for 4-6 min as indicated in the results section.

2.9 
 Statistics


vided by S. El Mestikawy, Laboratoire Neuroscience Paris Since, Universite

All values are expressed in the text as mean 6 SEM. For data sets with

Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris). Alexa Fluor 405-, or 594- and 647-

multiple conditions (N > 2), the data set was first subjected to a Kruskal-

conjugated secondary antibodies (1/500; Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA)

Wallis one-way analysis of variance followed by Dunn''s multiple com-

were used to detect mouse monoclonal, guinea pig and rabbit polyclonal.

parison test. For data set comprising only two conditions, a Mann-

OSTERSTOCK




ET AL.

1681

Whitney non-parametric U test was used for unpaired data points or a

the MEP where the highest density of NG2-positive glial endfeet was

Wilcoxon signed ranked test R for paired data points. p < .05 and

previously observed at E12.5 (Figures 1a3 and 2). Indeed, the density

p < .01 were taken respectively as significant and highly significant.

of NG21/Olig21 cells was significantly higher in the part of the MZ
surrounding the MEP compared with any other areas of the embryonic

3 
 RESULTS

spinal cord (Figure 1e2). Taken together, these observations suggest a
particular affinity of pioneer OPCs for the MZ surrounding the MEP.

3.1 
 Pioneer OPCs accumulate preferentially in the

This area is known to contain cholinergic MN axons and dendrites as

ventro-lateral domain of the marginal zone
surrounding the motor exit point

well as longitudinal axons from GABAergic and glutamatergic premotor
INs (Czarnecki et al., 2014; Vaughn et al., 1974). We previously showed
that premotor INs initiate synaptogenesis in the spinal cord by forming

In the mouse spinal cord, the first wave of OPCs is generated between
E12 and E14 from olig2-expressing neuroepithelial precursors forming

the first synapses onto MNs between E12.5 and E13.5 in the MZ
(Czarnecki et al., 2014; Scain et al., 2010).

the pMN domain (Bergles & Richardson, 2016). While it is known that
these pioneer OPCs first colonize the ventral half of the spinal cord,
their exact location, morphology and density during this process remain
poorly characterized. To address this issue, we performed immuno-

3.2 
 Pioneer OPCs receive functional glutamatergic
and GABAergic axoglial synapses

staining for NG2 and Olig2 onto coronal sections of spinal cord

To determine whether axoglial synapses could also be formed onto pio-

between E11.5 and E14.5.

neer OPCs in the MZ, we first performed co-immunostainings for NG2

At E11.5, we did not observe any NG2 immunoreactivity in the

with either VGluT2 or VIAAT, which stain putative vesicular release sites

olig21 pMN domain, although pericytes lining capillaries were already

for glutamate and GABA/Glycine vesicular transporters, respectively

intensely labelled for NG2 (data not shown). At E12.5, NG2 started

(Figure 3). Immunostainings were performed using CNP-EGFP mouse

labeling a subpopulation of cells in the olig2-expressing VZ domain

embryos to easily discriminate NG21/CNP-EGFP1 OPCs from NG21/

(Figure 1a1,a2). At this stage, only few NG21/Olig21 somas could be

CNP-EGFP- pericytes. In these mice, MNs exhibited a low level of EGFP

found outside the pMN domain in the ventral parenchyma and none in

expression, a likely consequence of the expression of EGFP in the pMN

the MZ. However, we observed numerous NG2-positive glial processes

domain at earlier developmental stages. As previously described (Czar-

running through the parenchyma and into the MZ to contact the basal

necki et al., 2014), we first confirmed that VGluT2 and VIAAT-

lamina (Figures 1a3 and 2). These NG2-positive glial processes were

immunoreactive aggregates were mostly restricted to the MZ. Both

more abundant around the motor exit point (MEP), where cholinergic

VIAAT and VGLUT2 aggregates could be found apposing to NG21/

MN axons exit the spinal cord (Figures 1a3 and 2). Discrete spots of

CNP-EGFP1 processes and cell bodies (Figure 3), suggesting that vesic-

NG2 immunoreactivity could also be observed lining the central canal,

ular synaptic release of GABA and glutamate may indeed occur from

suggesting that the first OPCs generated by the pMN domain exhibit a

longitudinal axons to OPC processes and cell bodies located in the MZ.

radial morphology--that is with radial processes contacting the basal

To determine whether these putative synaptic contacts were func-

lamina as well as the central canal. Because these morphological

tional, we performed whole-cell patch-clamp recordings of EGFP1 cells

features were reminiscent of neuroepithelial precursors, also known as

located in the MZ using whole spinal cord preparations obtained from

radial glial cells at this developmental stage, we performed co-

E13.5 and E14.5 CNP-EGFP mouse embryos. Virtually all EGFP1 cells

immunostaining for NG2 and Nestin, a marker of neuroepithelial pre-

located in the MZ were found positive for NG2 and Olig2 immunolabeling

cursors (Figure 2). We found a high degree of co-localization between

(Figure 4C). To further confirm that CNP-EGFP1 cells recorded in the MZ

NG2 and Nestin in glial processes located in the MZ around the MEP,

were OPCs, we filled some of them with biocytin through the patch pip-

suggesting a subset of neuroepithelial precursors transiently co-express

ette and performed post-hoc staining for NG2. All biocytin-filled CNP-

Nestin and NG2 as they start differentiating into OPCs at E12.5.

EGFP1 cells were found positive for NG2 immunolabeling (6/6 cells). They

Accordingly, we also observed a high degree of co-localization

exhibited an elongated morphology along the longitudinal axis with their

between NG2 and GLAST, a transmembrane glutamate astrocyte trans-

processes aligned to funicular axons, a morphological feature typical of

porter known to be expressed in the membrane of neuroepithelial pre-

OPCs found in axon tracts (Figure 4). Recorded EGFP1 cells had an aver-

cursors at this developmental stage (Figure 2c; Barry, Pakan, O''Keeffe,

age capacitance of 10.2 6 2.6 pF (N 5 40) and an average input resistance

& McDermott, 2013; Shibata et al., 1997).

of 1.81 6 0.44 GX (N 5 40). Recorded cells displayed significant voltage-

At E13.5, numerous NG21/Olig21 cells were observed in the

gated outward K1 currents but little or no voltage-gated inward Na1 cur-

pMN domain (Figure 1b1,b2,e3) but very few at E14.5 (Figure 1c1,c2,

rents, as expected for OPCs (Figure 4). Recorded cells were unable to fire

e3). These results confirmed that the emergence of pioneer OPCs from

action potentials when recorded in current-clamp mode (data not shown).

their neuro-epithelial precursors in the pMN domain is restricted to a
short time window starting at E12.5 and tapering at E14.5.

When the membrane potential (Vh) was equal to the chloride
equilibrium potential (ECl 5 260 mV; see Section 2), recordings of

After they leave the pMN domain, pioneer NG21/Olig21 cell

spontaneous activity revealed the presence of fast inwards currents

bodies started colonizing the ventral parenchyma and the MZ around

having an average amplitude of 27.5 6 0.7 pA, a 20%-80% rise time

E13.5. At E14.5, they were found preferentially accumulating around

of 0.293 6 0.02 ms and a decay time constant of 1.33 6 0.13 ms

1682




OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

Pioneer OPCs preferentially accumulate in the marginal zone surrounding the motor neuron axon exit point. (a1-c1) Confocal
images showing immunofluorescence stainings for Olig2 (red) and NG2 (green) in coronal sections of mouse spinal cord at E12.5, E13.5, and
E14.5. The most intense NG2 staining corresponds to the pericytes lining blood vessels. (a2-c2) Olig2 cells in the pMN domain start
expressing the proteoglycan NG2 at E12.5. Two days later at E14.5, only few NG21/Olig21 cells are still present in the pMN domain.
Dotted lines mark the limit between the ventricular zone and the parenchyma. (a3-c3) radial processes labelled by NG2 are first observed
in the marginal zone surrounding the motor exit point (MEP, marked by the asterisk) at E12.5 while the first NG21/Olig21 soma only reach
the MEP at E13.5, where they preferentially accumulate. Dotted lines mark the outer and inner limits of the marginal zone. (d) Drawings
summarizing the location of NG2 positive radial processes (in green) and Olig2 somas (in red) at E12.5, E13.5, and E14.5 in the spinal cord.
(e1) Schematic figure illustrating the different areas quantified in e2 and e3. (e2) Quantifications of the density of Olig2 positive cells in
different location of the ventral spinal cord at E12.5, E13.5, and E14.5. Note the preferential accumulation of Olig2 cells in the MEP at
E14.5. (e3) quantifications of the number of Olig2 cells observed in the pMN domain per section. (N 5 8-12 per embryonic stage). Data are
represented as mean 6 SEM. Statistical difference for the density (e2) and number (e3) of Olig2-immunopositive cells in the MEP and pMN
domain, respectively, are indicated (*p < .05, **p < .01). LMZ 5 lateral marginal zone; MEP 5 motor exit point; VMZ 5 ventral marginal zone;
VP 5 ventral parenchyma; DP 5 dorsal parenchyma; pMN 5 precursor of motoneuron domain [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 1

OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.




1683

NG2 immunostaining is detected in nestin-positive radial glia endfeet at E12.5 in the marginal zone. (a) Drawing showing where the
confocal images were taken in the spinal cord in b. (b1-b9) Confocal images showing immunofluorescence stainings for Nestin (red) and NG2
(cyan) in coronal sections of E12.5 mouse spinal cord. NG2 staining was found to colocalize both with nestin-positive processes in the pMN
domain contacting the central canal (b1-b3), in nestin-positive processes found across the parenchyma (b4-b6) and in nestin-positive endfeet
contacting the marginal zone surrounding the motor exit point (b7-b9). Scale bars represent 20 lm in b1-b6 and 10 lm in b7-b9. (c) Plot quantifying the percentage of NG21/Nestin1 endfeet located in the lateral marginal zone (LZ), around the motor exit point (MEP) and in the lateral and
ventral marginal zone (N 5 5 embryos). Statistical differences are as indicated (**p < .01). (d1-d3) Confocal images showing immunofluorescence
stainings for GLAST (red) and NG2 (cyan) in coronal sections of E12.5 mouse spinal cord. Note how NG2 staining colocalize with GLAST in glial
endfeet surrounding the motor exit point. Scale bar represents 10 lm [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

FIGURE 2

(N 5 25) consistent with previous reports of glutamatergic spontaneous

kainate glutamate receptors (Figure 5a1,a2). Inward sPSC had an average

postsynaptic currents (sPSC) in OPCs at postnatal developmental stages

frequency of 0.043 6 0.010 Hz and were almost completely blocked by

(Bergles & Richardson, 2016; Figure 5a). sPSC were fully blocked by the

TTX superfusion (1 lM; 299.61% 6 1.22%, p < .01) indicating that they

superfusion of 200 mM DL-APV and 10 mM CNQX (N 5 11) as well as by

are dependent on neuronal action potential (AP) firing (Figure 9a5). More-

CNQX alone (N 5 9), indicating that they were mediated by AMPA/

over, direct electrical stimulation of funicular axons was found to elicit

1684




OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

F I G U R E 3 Putative release sites for glutamate and GABA are found apposed to OPCs located in the MEP. (a1-a4) High magnification
confocal images showing the apposition of vesicular glutamate transporter, VGluT21 puncta (red) to pioneer OPCs located in the MEP and
identified by their expression of CNP-EGFP (in green) and NG2 (in cyan) in coronal sections of CNP-EGFP mouse spinal cord at E14.5. (b1-
b4) High magnification confocal images showing the apposition of the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter, VIAAT1 puncta (in red) to
pioneer OPCs located in the MEP and identified by their expression of CNP-EGFP (in green) and NG2 (in cyan) in coronal sections of CNPEGFP mouse spinal cord at E14.5. Scale bars 5 10 lm [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

ephaptic-like currents--resulting from compound AP in funicular axons

gabazine (N 5 6; Figure 6d,e). These results indicate that, in addition to

(Jefferys, 1995)--followed by fast-rising inward currents with an average

glutamatergic synapses, functional GABAergic axoglial synapses are

amplitude of 235.7 6 10.8 pA (N 5 8; Figure 6a,b). Fast-rising inward cur-

also formed between GABAergic axons located in the MZ and pioneer

rents were fully blocked by superfusion of DL-APV and CNQX (N 5 8) as

OPCs as soon as E13.5.

well as by CNQX alone (N 5 9). Taken together, our results demonstrate

Finally, to determine whether such axoglial synapses are formed onto

the existence of functional synapses between longitudinal glutamatergic

the radial processes of neuro-epithelial precursors as they start differenti-

axons located in the MZ and OPCs, at least as early as E13.5.

ating into OPCs, we investigated the presence of axoglial synapses onto

To assess the presence of GABA/glycine postsynaptic currents, we

nestin-positive processes located around the MEP at E12.5. Indeed, we

recorded OPC at a holding potential of 0 mV, the cationic equilibrium

found that most nestin-positive processes located in the MEP appear to

potential in our experimental conditions (Figure 5b). In this configura-

co-express the proteoglycan NG2 at this stage (Figure 2). Strikingly, elec-

tion, OPCs displayed spontaneous outward currents with an average

tron microscopy revealed the presence of synaptic-like axoglial contacts

amplitude of 4.4 6 0.7 pA, a rise time (20%-80%) of 1.81 6 0.15 ms

onto nestin-positive endfeet located in the MEP (Figure 7). These observa-

and a decay time constant of 86.75 6 10.21 ms (N 5 10; Figure 5b).

tions indicate that axoglial synapses could already be forming onto the

Superfusion of the GABAAR selective antagonist Gabazine (10 lM)

endfeet of neuro-epithelial precursors as they commit to an OPC fate.

fully blocked these outward sPSC (N 5 6; Figure 5b1,b2) confirming
that they were GABAergic events. Outward sPSCs had an average
frequency of 0.017 6 0.003 Hz and were almost completely blocked
by TTX superfusion (1 lM; 298.27% 6 5.19%, p < .01; N 5 9; Figure
9b5). Finally, direct electrical stimulation of funicular axons was found

3.3 
 GABAergic and glutamatergic axoglial synapses
are potentiated by the activation of presynaptic
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors

to elicit slow rising outward currents with an average amplitude

Because pioneer OPCs tend to accumulate around the MEP, we

of 10.1 6 2.8 pA (N 5 9) that were also blocked by superfusion of

investigated the possible influence of cholinergic signaling from MN

OSTERSTOCK




ET AL.

1685

CNP-GFP1 cells located in the marginal zone exhibit typical electrophysiological properties of OPCs. (a) Drawing of the
"open-book" whole spinal cord preparation obtained from CNP-EGFP mouse embryo SC to record pioneer OPCs in the spinal cord.
(b) Representative responses in voltage-clamp to voltage steps (a, 2100 to 210 mV, step size 10 mV) of a NG21/EGFP1 pioneer OPC
located at the MEP in a E13.5 CNP-EGFP mouse embryo. Note the presence of both transient IKA and sustained IKDR outward current in
response to depolarizing voltage steps. (c) Confocal image showing immunofluorescence stainings for NG2 (red) and olig2 (cyan) in the MEP
of a CNP-EGFP (Green) mouse embryo at E13.5. Note how CNP-EGFP cells located in the MEP are also immuno-positive for NG2 and
Olig2. Dotted lines mark the outer and inner limits of the marginal zone. Scale bar 5 20 mm. (d) Confocal images from a whole spinal cord
preparation showing the cell recorded in b filled with biocytin (in red) and co-expressing CNP-EGFP (in green) and NG2 (in cyan). Note how
NG21/CNP-EGFP1 cell processes tend to be longitudinally aligned along the antero-posterior axis. Scale bar 5 20 mm [Color figure can be
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 4

onto OPCs. Immunostainings for the vesicular acetylcholine transporter

210.1 6 2.2 pA vs. Ach: 29.1 6 1.9 pA, N 5 10) and GABAergic

vAChT labeled numerous putative release sites around MN soma and

(control: 5.35 6 1.6 pA vs. Ach: 4.9 6 1.5 pA, N 5 7) spontaneous PSCs.

inside the MZ, localized specifically around the MEP (Figure 8). Strik-

The action of acetylcholine on the frequency of glutamatergic and

ingly, many of these vAChT-positive puncta in the MEP were found in

GABAergic spontaneous PSC was blocked by the co-superfusion of

1

1

the direct vicinity of NG2 /CNP-EGFP soma and processes, support-

mecamylamine (50 mM) and d-tubocurarine (5 mM; Figure 9a3,b3). Meca-

ing the hypothesis that pioneer OPCs around the MEP could be influ-

mylamine is a non-competitive nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antago-

enced by acetylcholine released from MNs.

nist (Arias et al., 2010) and D-Tubocurarine is a classical non-selective

To address this possibility, we investigated the effect of acetylcho-

nAChR antagonist (Jonsson et al., 2006). It has been previously shown

line application onto OPCs by patch-clamp recordings. Acetylcholine

that the combination of these two antagonists is necessary and sufficient

application (100 mM) did not induce any significant change in baseline

in order to suppress cholinergic transmission in the embryonic mouse

current in any of the recorded OPCs (N 5 10), suggesting that AchR are

spinal cord (Hanson & Landmesser, 2003). The effect of acetylcholine

not functional or are not expressed by pioneer OPCs in the embryonic

application on the frequency of glutamatergic and GABAergic PSCs

spinal cord. In contrast, we observed that the same application of ace-

could be mimicked by the application of nicotine (10 mM; Figures 9a4,

tylcholine significantly increased the frequency of both glutamatergic

b4). Nicotine had no effect on the average amplitude of glutamatergic

and GABAergic spontaneous PSCs (Figure 9a2,b2). Acetylcholine had

(control: 27.9 6 1.4 pA vs. nicotine: 28.1 6 1.6 pA, N 5 8) and GABAer-

no significant effect on the average amplitude of glutamatergic (control:

gic (control: 4.2 6 1.4 pA vs. nicotine: 4.4 6 1.4 pA, N 5 10) spontaneous

1686




OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

Pioneer OPCs are already contacted by functional glutamatergic and GABAergic axoglial synapses when their somas reach the
MZ. (a1) Representative voltage-clamp recordings from a CNP-EGFP1 OPC located in the MEP at E13.5. At a holding potential of 260 mV,
the cell exhibited fast inward currents (left trace, control) that were blocked by the application of AMPAR/KAR and NMDAR antagonists
(center trace, DL-APV 200 lM/CNQX 20 lM) in a reversible manner (right trace, washout). (a2) Summary plot quantifying the partially
reversible blockade of fast inward currents by DL-APV and CNQX (N 5 11; **p < .01, paired student t test). (a3) Example traces showing
the kinetic of individual inward currents (in black) and their average (in red) recorded from the same OPC as in a1. These inward currents
exhibited an average mono-exponential decay time constant of 1.33 ms, as expected from synaptic currents mediated by AMPA/KA receptors. (a4) Plot showing the distribution of fast inward current amplitudes. (b1) Representative voltage-clamp recordings from another CNPEGFP1 OPC located in the MEP at E13.5. At a holding potential of 0 mV, the cell exhibited slow outward currents (left trace, control) that
were blocked by the application of a GABAAR antagonist (center trace, gabazine 10 lM) in a reversible manner (right trace). (b2) Summary
plot quantifying the partially reversible blockade slow outward currents by gabazine (N 5 6; **p < .01). (b3) Example traces showing the
kinetic of individual outward currents (in black) and their average (in red) recorded from the same OPC as in b1. These inward currents
exhibited an average mono-exponential decay time constant of 90.4 ms, as expected from synaptic currents mediated by GABAAR receptors. (b4) Plot showing the distribution of slow outward current amplitudes [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 5

OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.




1687

Cholinergic signaling potentiates glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic currents evoked in OPCs by electrical stimulation of the
marginal zone. (a) Representative voltage-clamp recordings from a CNP-EGFP1 OPC located in the MEP at E13.5. At a holding potential of
260 mV, electrical stimulation of the marginal zone evoked inward currents (left trace, control) that were blocked by the application of AMPAR/
KAR and NMDAR antagonists (center trace, DL-APV 200 lM/CNQX 20 lM) in a reversible manner (right trace, washout). (b) Summary plot
quantifying the partially reversible blockade of fast inward currents by DL-APV and CNQX (N 5 9; **p < .01). (c) Plots summarizing the effects
of various manipulations of cholinergic signaling on the amplitude of glutamatergic synaptic currents evoked in pioneer OPCs by electrical stimulation of the marginal zone. Statistical differences (**p < .01, paired student t test) are shown. (d) Representative voltage-clamp recordings from
a CNP-EGFP1 OPC located in the MEP at E13.5. At a holding potential of 0 mV, electrical stimulation of the marginal zone evoked outward currents (left trace, control) that were blocked by the application of GABAARs antagonists (center trace, Gabazine 10 lM) in a reversible manner
(right trace, washout). (e) Summary plot quantifying the partially reversible blockade of slow outward inward currents by gabazine (N 5 6;
**p < .01). (f) Plots summarizing the effects of various manipulations of cholinergic signaling on the amplitude of GABAergic synaptic currents
evoked in pioneer OPCs by electrical stimulation of the marginal zone. Statistical differences (**p < .01, paired student t test) are shown [Color
figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

FIGURE 6

1688




OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

Neuro-epithelial precursors receive synaptic-like axoglial contacts onto their endfeet in the marginal zone. (a1 and a2) Electron
micrographs showing a nestin-positive glial process located in the MEP (Silver intensified immunostaining, pseudo-colored in green) contacted by two synaptic-like axoglial contacts (pseudo-colored in red). The red arrows delimit the extent of the putative active zone where
presynaptic vesicles can be observed. a2 show a magnified view of the putative axo-glial synapse located in the white dashed box in a1
[Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

FIGURE 7

PSCs. Together, these results demonstrate that the effect of acetylcho-

placenta to reach the embryo (Ross, Graham, Money, & Stanwood,

line on PSC frequency is dependent on the activation of nicotinic AChRs

2015), we investigated whether fetal exposure to nicotine could influ-

(nAChR).

ence pioneer OPC density and proliferation as they emerge from the

We found that the ability of nicotine to potentiate the frequency of

pMN domain and start colonizing the spinal cord.

both GABAergic and glutamatergic PSC was preserved in the presence of

At E10.5, we implanted gestating mice with osmotic pumps filled

TTX (1 mM; Figure 9a5,b5), showing that nicotine and acetylcholine can

either with saline (Vehicle group, N 5 5) or 10 mg/d/kg of nicotine (nic-

promote PSC frequency by acting onto nAChR expressed by the presyn-

otine-treated group, N 5 6). Doses of nicotine were chosen to reach a

aptic terminals of axoglial synapses. The amplitude of miniature glutama-

level in the circulating bloodstream of the pregnant female equivalent

tergic PSCs (-7.6 6 0.7 pA, N 5 9) and miniature GABAergic PSCs (5.9 6

to moderately smoking pregnant women (Matta et al., 2007). To assess

0.7 pA, N 5 8) observed during nicotine application were not significantly

the distribution and proliferation rate of pioneer OPCs, we quantified

different from the amplitude of spontaneous glutamatergic PSCs (27.8 6

the number of cells expressing Olig21 cells and Olig21/Ki671 in differ-

1.3 pA) and spontaneous GABAergic PSCs (6.0 6 0.5 pA) recorded in

ent parts of the MZ, in the ventral parenchyma, and in the dorsal

control conditions in the same cells. To test whether endogenous source

parenchyma of E14.5 embryos treated with either saline or nicotine

of acetylcholine could therefore participate to potentiate axoglial trans-

(Figure 10a). We found that nicotine increased the density of Olig21

mission onto OPC, we investigated the influence of nAChR antagonists

cells in the MZ surrounding the MEP and in the ventral parenchyma by

onto sPSCs (Figures 9a3,a7,b3,b7) and onto PSCs evoked by direct electrical stimulation of funicular axons (Figure 6c,f). We found that the cosuperfusion of mecamylamine (50 mM) and d-tubocurarine (5 mM) had little influence on glutamatergic sPSC frequency (Figure 9a3,a7) and on the
amplitude of evoked glutamatergic PSCs (Figure 6c). By contrast, cosuperfusion of mecamylamine (50 mM) and d-tubocurarine (5 mM) significantly decreased GABAergic sPSC frequency (Figure 9b3,b7) as well as
the amplitude of evoked GABAergic PSCs (Figure 6f), thus indicating that
endogenous cholinergic signaling act preferentially onto GABAergic axoglial synapses.

3.4 
 Fetal nicotine exposure increases the density and
proliferation of pioneer OPC in the ventral spinal cord

twofold compared with saline-treated embryos (Figure 10b). By contrast, density of Olig21 cells did not appear to be affected in the lateral
and ventral part of the marginal zone, nor in the dorsal parenchyma.
Moreover, we found that chronic nicotine treatment significantly
increased the percentage of Olig21 cells co-expressing Ki67 around
the MEP by twofold compared with saline-treated embryos (Figure
10c). Taken together, our results show that chronic nicotine treatment
during gliogenesis preferentially increases the density and proliferation
of OPC located in the MZ surrounding the MEP.

4 
 DISCUSSION
In this study, we demonstrate that functional glutamatergic and

Our results show that exogenous nicotine has a significant effect on

GABAergic axoglial synapses are formed onto pioneer OPCs at least as

both glutamatergic and GABAergic axoglial transmission in pioneer

soon as their soma reach the marginal zone--that is the area where

OPCs found in the MZ (Figures 6 and 9). As nicotine readily cross the

synaptogenesis begins in the embryonic spinal cord. We found that

OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.




1689

F I G U R E 8 Putative acetylcholine release sites are found apposed to OPCs located in the MEP. (a1-a4) confocal images at low
magnification showing the location of putative release sites for acetylcholine labelled by VAChT (in red) and pioneer OPCs labelled by CNPEGFP (in green) and NG2 (in cyan) in a coronal section from a CNP-EGFP E14.5 mouse embryo. Note how VAChT staining is limited to the
ventro-lateral parenchyma where motoneurons are located in the spinal cord. (b1-b4) confocal images of the same coronal section at a
higher magnification (boxed region in a1-a4) showing the presence of VAChT1 puncta (in red) in the vicinity of pioneer OPCs labelled by
CNP-EGFP (in green) and NG2 (in cyan). (c1-c4) Confocal image at the highest magnification (boxed region in B1-B4) showing the presence
of VAChT1 puncta apposed to OPCs located at the MEP (white arrows) [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

endogenous cholinergic signaling regulates the activity of GABAergic

the neuroepithelial precursors that generate them. Indeed, we show

axoglial synapses by acting through presynaptic nAChRs. Finally, we

that early born NG2-positive OPCs already exhibit radial processes

demonstrate that over-activation of nAChR by chronic nicotine fetal

contacting the marginal zone and the central canal while their soma is

exposure leads to a significant increase in OPC density and prolifera-

still located in the ventricular zone. Intriguingly, we found that these

tion in the ventral part of the embryonic spinal cord. Taken together,

NG2-positive radial processes transiently co-express the neuro-

our results show that axoglial synapses are formed onto pioneer OPCs

epithelial markers nestin and GLAST. We propose that either (1) neuro-

as soon as they arise from their precursor domain and that their ability

epithelial precursors directly transform into OPCs or (2) neuro-

to proliferate and colonize the ventral embryonic spinal cord can be

epithelial precursors undergo asymmetric division to generate neuro-

altered by changes in cholinergic signaling.

epithelial precursors and OPCs with similar radial morphologies that
are closely associated. A number of evidence supports the former

4.1 
 Do neuroepithelial precursors in the pMN
domain directly transform into pioneer OPCs?

explanation. First, Fogarty et al., showed that the second wave of
OPCs arising from the dbx1 domain in the dorsal spinal cord occurs by
direct transformation of radial glial precursors into OPCs (Fogarty,

We show here that the first OPCs that can be identified by NG2 immu-

Richardson, & Kessaris, 2005). Similar to our observation in the pMN

noreactivity in the pMN domain exhibit a radial morphology similar to

domain, they found that OPC generation in the dbx1 domain was

1690




OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

Cholinergic signaling potentiates axoglial synapses by acting onto presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. (a1)
Representative voltage-clamp recordings from a CNP-EGFP1 OPC located in the MEP at E13.5. At a holding potential of 260 mV, the cell
exhibited glutamatergic synaptic currents (left trace, control) that were potentiated by the application of acetylcholine (center trace, Ach
100 lM) in a reversible manner (right trace, washout). (a2-a5) Representative plots from individual cells showing the changes in instantaneous frequency of glutamatergic synaptic currents during application of acetylcholine alone (top trace, Ach 100 mM) or in presence of nAChR
antagonists (second trace, Mecamylamine 50 mM 1 d-Tubocurarine 5 mM) as well as to nicotine alone (third trace, Nicotine 10 mM) or in
presence of tetrotoxin (bottom trace, TTX 1 mM) showing that activation of presynaptic nAChR potentiates glutamate synaptic release onto
pioneer OPCs. (a6 and a7) Plots summarizing the effects of these various manipulations of cholinergic signaling onto glutamatergic synaptic
current frequency. (b1) Representative voltage-clamp recordings from a CNP-EGFP1 OPC located in the MEP at E13.5. At a holding potential of 0 mV, the cell exhibited GABAergic synaptic currents (left trace, control) that were potentiated by the application of acetylcholine
(center trace, Ach 100 lM) in a reversible manner (right trace, washout). (b2-b5) Representative plots from individual cells showing the
changes in instantaneous frequency of GABAergic synaptic currents during application of acetylcholine alone (top trace, Ach 100 mM) or in
presence of nAChR antagonists (second trace, Mecamylamine 50 mM 1 d-Tubocurarine 5 mM) as well as to nicotine alone (third trace, Nic
10 mM) or in presence of tetrotoxin (bottom trace, TTX 1 mM) showing that activation of presynaptic nAChR potentiates GABA synaptic
release onto pioneer OPCs. (b6 and b7) Plots summarizing the effect of manipulating cholinergic signaling onto GABAergic synaptic currents
frequency (mean, SEM). Number of independent repeats (n) for each experiment is specified in the figure. Statistical differences are as indicated (*p < .05, **p < .01) [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 9

associated with the appearance of a transient population of radial glial

accumulating around the MEP, where the radial processes of most of

cells co-expressing both OPC and neuro-epithelial precursor markers.

these Nestin1/Olig21 precursors are initially located. Finally, we show

Second, we observed that the pool of olig2-expressing neuro-epithelial

that putative axoglial synapses can be found onto nestin-positive proc-

precursor in the pMN domain is drastically depleted at E14.5 (see Fig-

esses in the MZ at E12.5 while just one day later, functional axoglial

ure 1e3) right after the first wave of OPC has been generated. Taken

synapses can be recorded in pioneer OPCs whose soma have reached

together, these observations support the hypothesis that pMN precur-

the MZ. The fact that both pioneer OPCs and the neuroepithelial

sors directly transform into OPCs by detaching from the ventricular

precursors they arise from would share such a particular feature brings

zone to follow their radial process into the marginal zone. This would

further support to the hypothesis that OPCs directly transform from

also explain why the soma of pioneer OPCs are preferentially found

neuro-epithelial precursors and inherit their axoglial synapses in the

OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.




1691

Chronic fetal nicotine exposure increases OPC density and proliferation at the motor exit point. (a) Confocal images showing
immunofluorescence stainings for Olig2 (red) and Ki67 (green) in coronal sections of mouse spinal cord from E14.5 embryos. Embryos were
treated from E10.5 to E14.5 stages by implanting pregnant females with osmotic pumps containing either saline (a1-a4, saline) or nicotine
(a5-a8, Nicotine 10 mg/kg). Note the increased density of Olig21 cells (arrowheads) in the ventral spinal cord of nicotine-treated embryos
(Scale bar 5 100 lm). (b) Plots quantifying the density of Olig21 cells in different regions of the spinal cord in saline- and nicotine-treated
embryos. VMZ 5 ventral marginal zone; MEP 5 motor exit point; LMZ 5 lateral marginal zone; VP 5 ventral parenchyma; DP 5 dorsal parenchyma (For the exact location of each area quantified, see drawing in Figure 1c1). The density of Olig21 cells was significantly increased in
the MEP and the VP of nicotine-treated embryos. (c) Plots quantifying the ratio of Ki671/Olig21 cells in different regions of the spinal cord
in saline- and nicotine-treated embryos. The proliferation rate of Olig21 cells was significantly increased in the MEP of nicotine-treated
embryos. Statistical differences (ns, not significant, *p < .05, **p < .01) are shown [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

FIGURE 10

1692




OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

process. In contrast, some evidence also support the second hypothesis

feedback mechanism linking the onset of gliogenesis to the functional

--that is that the nestin-positive and NG2-positive radial processes

maturity of the developing spinal cord neuronal network.

found in the MZ belong to distinct but closely associated cell popula-

To further investigate whether axoglial synapses are indeed sys-

tions. This hypothesis is favored by Diers-Fenger and colleagues who

tematically formed at the onset of gliogenesis, it would be of great

showed in E15 mouse spinal cord that processes stained with AN2/NG2

interest to explore the other areas of the central nervous system

antibodies were closely associated to radial glial processes stained with

known to generate OPCs during embryonic development (Richardson,

Nestin (Diers-Fenger, Kirchhoff, Kettenmann, Levine, & Trotter, 2001).

Kessaris, & Pringle, 2006). For example, the second wave of OPCs generated by radial glia in the dorsal spinal cord (Bilican, Fiore-Heriche,

4.2 
 Could the onset of synaptogenesis trigger
OPC specification?
Our present work suggests that axoglial synapses are a universal and

Compston, Allen, & Chandran, 2008; Fogarty et al., 2005; Vallstedt,
Klos, & Ericson, 2005) is correlated with the onset of synaptogenesis in
the dorsal marginal zone when peripheral sensory inputs enter the dorsal spinal cord (Marmigere & Ernfors, 2007).

defining property of OPCs, regardless of their location (brain vs. spinal

In conclusion, we demonstrated for the first time that OPCs are

cord) or developmental stages (embryonic vs. postnatal). Indeed, axoglial

contacted by functional synapses as soon as they emerge from their

synapses are known to disappear as soon as OPCs differentiate into oli-

precursor domain and that embryonic spinal cord invasion by OPCs

godendrocytes (De Biase et al., 2010; Etxeberria et al., 2010; Kukley et al.,

can be regulated by cholinergic signaling acting onto these axoglial syn-

2010) and we now show that they are also formed as soon as OPCs are

apses, revealing new functional developmental mechanisms during the

generated during embryonic development. More importantly, our work

formation of the spinal cord network.

suggests that axoglial synapses may even participate to trigger, or at least
regulate, OPC genesis from neuroepithelial precursors. Indeed, electron

ACKNOWLE DGME NT

microscopy show that the emergence of OPCs from neuro-epithelial pre-

We thank Stefania Tolu and Philippe Faure for assistance with nicotine

cursors is concomitant with the formation of synaptic-like axoglial con-

ronique Bernard,
administration and osmotic pump implantation; Ve

tacts onto neuro-epithelial precursors glial processes located in the

raldine Toutirais and Michae
l Trichet for assistance with electron
Ge

marginal zone (see Figure 7; Henrikson & Vaughn, 1974). Moreover, our

microscopy; Susanne Bolte, Jean-Francois Gilles and Richard

results suggest that the potentiation of glutamatergic and/or GABAergic

Schwartzmann for assistance with confocal imaging and Elim Hong for

axoglial transmission by nicotine could not only favor the secondary pro-

helpful comments on the manuscript. This study was supported by

liferation of pioneer OPCs in the marginal zone surrounding the MEP, but

Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR-11-JSV4-002-01 (J-M.M),

also facilitate the recruitment of neuro-epithelial precursors into OPC.

phale (J-M.M), AFMInstitut de Recherche sur la Moelle et l''ence

Indeed, we observed that fetal nicotine exposure could increase OPC

dicale (P.L).
Telethon (J-M.M) and Fondation pour la Recherche Me

density in the ventral parenchyma without any increase in their local proliferation rate (see Figure 10). Therefore, these supernumerary parenchymal OPCs must have been generated elsewhere. Because they are
located along the path likely to be taken by most pioneer OPCs right after
they leave the pMN domain, their most likely origin would therefore be
the pMN domain itself. Indeed, they are located along the path traced by
NG2/nestin radial glial endfeets at E12.5 (see Figures 1a and 2) and
we showed that pioneer OPCs transiently accumulate in the ventral
parenchyma at E13.5 before colonizing the marginal zone at E14.5 (see
Figure 1e2).
We hypothesize that the formation of axoglial synapses allow glial
precursors to insure that the neuronal components of the ventral spinal

AUTHOR CONT RI BUT IONS
G. Osterstock designed, performed and analyzed all electrophysiogical, fetal
nicotine treatment and most immunohistochemistry experiments. B. Lebras
designed, performed and analyzed electron microscopy experiments. K.
Arulkandarajah performed additional immunohistochemistry experiments.
H. Le Corronc and A. Czarnecki participated to the design and analysis of
electrophysiological experiments. C. Mouffle and E. Bullier managed the
animal colony, performed animal genotyping and contributed to immunohistochemistry experiments. J-M Mangin participated to the design and
analysis of the experiments, supervised the whole project with P. Legendre
and wrote the manuscript with G. Osterstock and P. Legendre.

motor network have been properly connected and are functional
before initiating gliogenesis. Indeed, it has long been known that ven-

ORC ID

tral spinal motor networks start exhibiting bursts of spontaneous neuronal activity (SNA) around E12.5 in mouse embryos (Hanson, Milner,
& Landmesser, 2008) when the first OPC are specified. We previously

Pascal Legendre
Jean-Marie Mangin

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5086-4515
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7804-0251

showed that SNA triggers the release of acetylcholine from MNs and
the release of GABA and glutamate from spinal interneurons (Czarnecki

RE FE RE NC ES

et al., 2014). We show here that pioneer OPCs could directly detect

Arias, H. R., Rosenberg, A., Targowska-Duda, K. M., Feuerbach, D., Jozwiak,
K., Moaddel, R., & Wainer, I. W. (2010). Tricyclic antidepressants and
mecamylamine bind to different sites in the human a4b2 nicotinic receptor ion channel. The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology, 42
(6), 1007-1018. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2010.03.002

GABA and glutamate released during SNA through their axoglial synapses and indirectly detect acetylcholine by its action onto the presynaptic nAChRs. Therefore, SNA and axoglial synapses could act as a

OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.




1693

Barry, D. S., Pakan, J. M. P., O''Keeffe, G. W., & McDermott, K. W. (2013).
The spatial and temporal arrangement of the radial glial scaffold suggests
a role in axon tract formation in the developing spinal cord. Journal of
Anatomy, 222(2), 203-213. http://doi.org/10.1111/joa.12006

Henrikson, C. K., & Vaughn, J. E. (1974). Fine structural relationships
between neurites and radial glial processes in developing mouse
spinal cord. Journal of Neurocytology, 3(6), 659-675. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4461770

Bergles, D. E., & Richardson, W. D. (2016). Oligodendrocyte Development and Plasticity. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 8(2),
a020453. http://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a020453

Herzog, E., Bellenchi, G. C., Gras, C., Bernard, V., Ravassard, P., Bedet, C.,
. . . El Mestikawy, S. (2001). The existence of a second vesicular glutamate transporter specifies subpopulations of glutamatergic neurons.
The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for
Neuroscience, 21(22), RC181. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/11698619

Bergles, D. E., Roberts, J. D., Somogyi, P., & Jahr, C. E. (2000). Glutamatergic synapses on oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the hippocampus. Nature, 405(6783), 187-191. http://doi.org/10.1038/35012083
Bernard, V., Levey, A. I., & Bloch, B. (1999). Regulation of the subcellular
distribution of m4 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in striatal neurons in vivo by the cholinergic environment: Evidence for regulation
of cell surface receptors by endogenous and exogenous stimulation.
The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for
Neuroscience, 19(23), 10237-10249. Retrieved from http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10575021
Bilican, B., Fiore-Heriche, C., Compston, A., Allen, N. D., & Chandran, S.
(2008). Induction of Olig2 precursors by FGF involves BMP signalling
blockade at the Smad level. PloS One, 3(8), e2863. http://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0002863
Czarnecki, A., Le Corronc, H., Rigato, C., Le Bras, B., Couraud, F., Scain,
A.-L., . . . Legendre, P. (2014). Acetylcholine controls GABA-, glutamate-, and glycine- dependent giant depolarizing potentials that govern spontaneous motoneuron activity at the onset of synaptogenesis
in the mouse embryonic spinal cord. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(18),
6389. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2664-13.2014
De Biase, L. M., Nishiyama, A., & Bergles, D. E. (2010). Excitability and
synaptic communication within the oligodendrocyte lineage. Journal
of Neuroscience, 30(10), 3600-3611. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6000-09.2010

Hill, R. A., & Nishiyama, A. (2014). NG2 cells (polydendrocytes): Listeners
to the neural network with diverse properties. Glia, 62(8), 1195-
1210. http://doi.org/10.1002/glia.22664
Jefferys, J. G. (1995). Nonsynaptic modulation of neuronal activity in the
brain: Electric currents and extracellular ions. Physiological Reviews,
75(4), 689-723. http://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.1995.75.4.689
Jonsson, M., Gurley, D., Dabrowski, M., Larsson, O., Johnson, E. C., &
Eriksson, L. I. (2006). Distinct pharmacologic properties of neuromuscular blocking agents on human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors: A possible explanation for the train-of-four fade. Anesthesiology, 105(3), 521-533. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16931985
Kukley, M., Capetillo-Zarate, E., & Dietrich, D. (2007). Vesicular glutamate release from axons in white matter. Nature Neuroscience, 10(3),
311-320. http://doi.org/10.1038/nn1850
Kukley, M., Nishiyama, A., & Dietrich, D. (2010). The fate of synaptic
input to NG2 glial cells: Neurons specifically downregulate
transmitter release onto differentiating oligodendroglial cells. The
Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for
Neuroscience, 30(24), 8320-8331. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0854-10.2010

Diers-Fenger, M., Kirchhoff, F., Kettenmann, H., Levine, J. M., & Trotter,
J. (2001). AN2/NG2 protein-expressing glial progenitor cells in the
murine CNS: Isolation, differentiation, and association with radial glia.
Glia, 34(3), 213-228. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11329183

Lin, S.-C., & Bergles, D. E. (2004). Synaptic signaling between neurons
and glia. Glia, 47(3), 290-298. http://doi.org/10.1002/glia.20060

vi, S., Isambert, M. F., Henry, J.
Dumoulin, A., Rostaing, P., Bedet, C., Le
P., . . . Gasnier, B. (1999). Presence of the vesicular inhibitory amino
acid transporter in GABAergic and glycinergic synaptic terminal boutons. Journal of Cell Science, 811-823. Retrieved from http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10036231

Mangin, J.-M., Kunze, A., Chittajallu, R., & Gallo, V. (2008). Satellite NG2
progenitor cells share common glutamatergic inputs with associated
interneurons in the mouse dentate gyrus. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 28(30),
7610-7623. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1355-08.2008

Etxeberria, A., Mangin, J.-M., Aguirre, A., & Gallo, V. (2010). Adult-born
SVZ progenitors receive transient synapses during remyelination in
corpus callosum. Nature Neuroscience, 13(3), 287. http://doi.org/10.
1038/nn.2500

Marmigere, F., & Ernfors, P. (2007). Specification and connectivity of
neuronal subtypes in the sensory lineage. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 8(2), 114-127. http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2057

Fogarty, M., Richardson, W. D., & Kessaris, N. (2005). A subset of oligodendrocytes generated from radial glia in the dorsal spinal cord.
Development (Cambridge, England), 132(8), 1951-1959. http://doi.org/
10.1242/dev.01777
Gallo, V., Mangin, J.-M., Kukley, M., & Dietrich, D. (2008). Synapses on NG2expressing progenitors in the brain: Multiple functions? The Journal of
Physiology, 586(16), 3767. http://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2008.158436
Hanson, M. G., & Landmesser, L. T. (2003). Characterization of the
circuits that generate spontaneous episodes of activity in the early
embryonic mouse spinal cord. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 23(2), 587-600. Retrieved
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12533619
Hanson, M. G., Milner, L. D., & Landmesser, L. T. (2008). Spontaneous
rhythmic activity in early chick spinal cord influences distinct motor
axon pathfinding decisions. Brain Research Reviews, 57(1), 77-85.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.06.021

Lin, S., & Bergles, D. E. (2004). Synaptic signaling between GABAergic
interneurons and oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the hippocampus.
Nature Neuroscience, 7(1), 24-32. http://doi.org/10.1038/nn1162

Matta, S. G., Balfour, D. J., Benowitz, N. L., Boyd, R. T., Buccafusco, J. J.,
Caggiula, A. R., . . . Zirger, J. M. (2007). Guidelines on nicotine dose
selection for in vivo research. Psychopharmacology, 190(3), 269-319.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-006-0441-0
Nishiyama, A., Lin, X. H., Giese, N., Heldin, C. H., & Stallcup, W. B.
(1996). Co-localization of NG2 proteoglycan and PDGF alphareceptor on O2A progenitor cells in the developing rat brain. Journal
of Neuroscience Research, 43(3), 299-314. http://doi.org/10.1002/
(SICI)1097-4547(19960201)43:3<299::AID-JNR5>3.0.CO;2-E
Paukert, M., & Bergles, D. E. (2006). Synaptic communication between
neurons and NG21 cells. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16(5), 515-
521. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2006.08.009
Pringle, N. P., & Richardson, W. D. (1993). A singularity of PDGF alphareceptor expression in the dorsoventral axis of the neural tube may
define the origin of the oligodendrocyte lineage. Development (Cambridge, England), 117(2), 525-533. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8330523

1694




OSTERSTOCK

ET AL.

Richardson, W. D., Kessaris, N., & Pringle, N. (2006). Oligodendrocyte
wars. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 7(1), 11-18. http://doi.org/10.
1038/nrn1826

Vallstedt, A., Klos, J. M., & Ericson, J. (2005). Multiple dorsoventral origins of oligodendrocyte generation in the spinal cord and hindbrain.
Neuron, 45(1), 55-67. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.12.026

Ross, E. J., Graham, D. L., Money, K. M., & Stanwood, G. D. (2015).
Developmental consequences of fetal exposure to drugs: What we
know and what we still must learn. Neuropsychopharmacology, 40(1),
61-87. http://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2014.147

Vaughn, J. E., Henrikson, C. K., & Grieshaber, J. A. (1974). A quantitative
study of synapses on motor neuron dendritic growth cones in developing mouse spinal cord. The Journal of Cell Biology, 60(3), 664-672.
Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4824291

Rowitch, D. H. (2004). Glial specification in the vertebrate neural tube.
Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 5(5), 409-419. http://doi.org/10.1038/
nrn1389

Yuan, X., Chittajallu, R., Belachew, S., Anderson, S., McBain, C. J., &
Gallo, V. (2002). Expression of the green fluorescent protein in the
oligodendrocyte lineage: A transgenic mouse for developmental and
physiological studies. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 70(4), 529-
545. http://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.10368

Sahel, A., Ortiz, F. C., Kerninon, C., Maldonado, P. P., Angulo, M. C., &
Nait-Oumesmar, B. (2015). Alteration of synaptic connectivity of
oligodendrocyte precursor cells following demyelination. Frontiers in
Cellular Neuroscience, 9, 77. http://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2015.00077
Scain, A.-L., Le Corronc, H., Allain, A.-E., Muller, E., Rigo, J.-M., Meyrand,
P., . . . Legendre, P. (2010). Glycine release from radial cells modulates
the spontaneous activity and its propagation during early spinal cord
development. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the
Society for Neuroscience, 30(1), 390-403. http://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2115-09.2010
Shibata, T., Yamada, K., Watanabe, M., Ikenaka, K., Wada, K., Tanaka, K.,
& Inoue, Y. (1997). Glutamate transporter GLAST is expressed in the
radial glia-astrocyte lineage of developing mouse spinal cord. The
Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 17(23), 9212-9219. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/9364068

Ziskin, J. L., Nishiyama, A., Rubio, M., Fukaya, M., & Bergles, D. E.
(2007). Vesicular release of glutamate from unmyelinated axons in
white matter. Nature Neuroscience, 10(3), 321-330. http://doi.org/10.
1038/nn1854

How to cite this article: Osterstock G, Le Bras B, Arulkandarajah KH, et al. Axoglial synapses are formed onto pioneer oligodendrocyte precursor cells at the onset of spinal cord
gliogenesis. Glia. 2018;66:1678-1694. https://doi.org/10.1002/
glia.23331

;;
